case at Harvard where they had a copy of a book, I can't recall the title, that was so perfect, it was so exquisite, an English book, that Jackson decided to sell it.
And then they sold it.
And he said, ironically, it has now made its way to Princeton through a collection which just came
Jackson was called over here the Grand Inquisitor.
But he said the reason that Jackson decided to sell it, and Nicholas actually thought this is defensible, is that because it is so perfect, it shouldn't be kept in a library where people would have access to it, and perhaps a private collector would keep it in its pristine shape.
And I said, I'm amazed at it.
It's on tape.
I don't know how to find it.
It's funny which one it was, because I remember there was one when I went to Princeton.
Robert Taylor had a book.
It was a marvelous copy of Henry Warren's Alex Sinterland.
That's it.
He said it went into the Bob Taylor collection to Princeton.
And that's precisely the title.
That's a cute story, isn't it?
Henry Warren is one of my people.
and I knew that, I wanted to handle that book, and Robert Taylor wouldn't, and he just wouldn't let me.
But that's what happens.
Yes, Harvard had it, and I can't imagine, why couldn't they just put some kind of quarantine on it?
I don't know.
But Nicholas points out, and it's true, the purpose of a repository, a university, of the British Library is to,
Well, if you're lucky, of course, you might have a second copy.
That would be wonderful.
Now, I had an American visitor yesterday.
He wanted to see a copy of Boswell's Life of Johnson's presentation of Boswell's Life of Johnson.
Well, I was able to show him what I think is as perfect a copy of that book as is in existence.
He acquired about five years ago a collection of a real magpie.
He went on buying presentations of Bosworth Johnson until he got one, which was absolutely perfect.
But if that were issued to readers, it wouldn't actually last.
So you don't issue it to readers?
No.
probably three other copies of that particular book.
This collector had four.
Why does a collector want that many copies of the book?
Or is it just the endless quest of the book?
Well, I think in the case of this particular collector, he was actually in search of the perfect copy.
Did he have perfect copies of other books?
Or was it just the perfect copy of this book?
I was thinking that that was one of the outstanding ones, yes.
He had a marvellous collection of copies of Coach Duncey, which I think he... I can't remember again the story, but I think he kept in its original reference.
And he sent it to the box, to the binder, and the binder promptly bound it.
But it's still uncut.
It's a lovely copy.
And unfortunately it's been bound.
I'm told that Lady Eccles has, I think, the annotated... Some people actually consider her the greatest living collector.
Which I still know there are a number of American universities anxious.
You walk in the Morgan Library, her name is prominent.
She's really marvelous.
I met her at the Grosier.
I've interviewed Bill Scheide by the way.
That's kind of a coup for me because he hasn't given any interviews.
He is the example.
I will write this chapter.
I spent four hours with him on a Friday evening in the Princeton Library.
He started with his
his 42-line Bible, as he called it, and I didn't know what he was getting.
It was just a box.
I put it down on my lap, and he went back.
I was dizzy.
It isn't often one holds it for a Bible.
He's got a 1457 Psalter, which we haven't.
He's got something that you took out.
He said, he's the only Anglo-Saxon book in North America.
The Lickling Homilies.
It is the best hang of Saxonbrook in North America.
It isn't strictly speaking, I think, the only... They've got the Willow Edgifull, hasn't it?
Yes.
Which is another very good hang of Saxonbrook.
I think they're one too strong.
But the Lickling Homilies.
Well, I'd have to look at Neil Kerr's catalogue of
I have a Saxon manuscript.
I think the Blickling homilies are basically the best Anglo-Saxon book in there, but they're only two scraps.
Well, that was a close celeb.
Yeah.
When it left.
The circumstances end up.
I don't know the circumstances.
Well, I know Ed Wolff writes about it in his Rosenbach book.
Yes, well, that's a great book.
I've interviewed Ed, by the way.
Yeah, at least, yes, at least.
I've really talked to quite a number of people.
Well, we will contrast, not in the same chapter, of course, but it will happen in the book.
You come to a place like this, or you go to Cambridge, and you go to the Holy Library, and you go to the Bible, and you go to the Bible, and then I go to Texas, I spent four days in Texas, which is a fascinating story.
I've never been to Texas, I know the others, but the story of the formation of the collections there.
in a 15-year period, of course, focusing on the 20th century.
Well, of course, they were able to move backwards in time.
They bought a lot of those, didn't they?
They basically got that collection.
That was when Decker Turner was there.
Decker changed things, changed the focus for a while.
But it's an interesting story.
Quintessentially Texan, I think.
Yes.
Well, what was the perception over here when Texas was buying up all this stuff?
Well, I wasn't working in this library, then I was working at the British Museum, then.
Well, we just couldn't get in it.
I think... You couldn't get what I'm saying?
Well, we couldn't get near the material they were buying.
Even though you wanted it.
You'd like to have had some of it?
The British Museum in those days was a bit odd, because they didn't, and they weren't actually very interested in modern literary manuscripts, which is really what Texas would find.
That did demonstrate a bit, of course, a perception of that in their prime, wouldn't you think?
Yes, I think they probably, as we've said, went over the top a bit, because they must have quite a lot of junk there.
But on the other hand, they've got some very good things as well.
Roger Kennedy at the Smithsonian, I don't know if you know Roger.
He has the Smithsonian Museum of the American History.
Not a book collection, but he's an interesting man.
He collects things.
Things in the literal sense.
And we were talking about Texas.
And he said, you know, yeah, I'll bet there's a lot of junk there.
He said, but sometimes the junk is very important.
Yeah.
Well, there's a lot of junk here, too.
He said, to fully understand the masterpiece, it's really very useful sometimes to look at the junk.
That's true, yes.
In a collection like ours, which has been growing up over centuries, in some ways, there's very little discrimination about what came in.
You see, if you go to the great American collections, they're probably, in some respects, better than ours for named authors.
Yale's probably got better collections of some 18th century authors than we have.
They've got all the books that the authors wrote, but they haven't got all the books that the authors read.
And they're here?
Well, we've got massive pamphlet collections.
They're not individually important, but they are important as a collection.
As Marcus was saying about the Tamerlane, we don't have a pose.
If any institution in the United States should have a pose, Tamerlane should be.
It belongs.
One belongs in the word antiquarius.
We've got a Bayson book.
Bayson is nice.
Well, they have a Bayson.
That came in with Isaiah Thomas.
That's wonderful.
You get these things almost contemporary with hair.
That's kind of close.
But to go back to the Don Quixote, just briefly, you did buy it when it was issued.
Our agent bought it, yes.
This is on record, you had an agent in Spain.
Our bookseller went to Spain.
And he was not treated terribly well there, because there's a great deal of enmity on both political and religious grounds between England and Spain.
We're talking about a time not long after a great war between the two nations.
Well, I think that we were actually at peace at the time.
Well, I mean, it's a hundred years since the American Civil War, and it's just now the North and the South are just starting to get along, you know.
So what happened?
The agent went there?
He went there.
He bought quite a lot of Spanish books.
So he didn't really go there to buy Don Quixote?
No, he went there to buy Spanish books.
St.
Thomas Bodley was actually using the agent to go to the continent to buy continental books because that's much more important.
The continental booksellers and printers are much more important.
for a learned library, they're English books.
So you have to buy books abroad.
Are there any other examples of great books that you think were bought?
Well, that's probably the most famous in South Africa, when they came out abroad.
What's the condition of your copy?
It's well used.
It's actually been rebound.
that the librarian would have taken off the shelves to show to his important visitors.
And the result, of course, is that issues had to be rebound.
Can you dazzle me with numbers?
Can you tell me, give me a rough idea of what you've rolled here?
Well, we can probably get, we say we've got over five million volumes.
But these are, well, are they manuscripts?
I don't know what, how we get from the manuscripts.
We would say in almost every respect we've got the largest collections in Britain except for the British Library.
If you go to Cambridge, they'll say they've got more taxons than we've got.
We get that out of here.
They have got more taxons than we've got.
But I bet we've got about six or seven thousand in the library, which makes this one of the largest collections in the world.
And we've got the largest collection of early English books after the British Library.
I think we recommend that our collections of the restoration drama are probably the highest in the world.
English 18th century books, we have again after the British Library, the largest books.
Generally speaking, it is English material.
Yes.
But the continental collections are extremely good.
And of course, not only in the Bodden Library itself, but in Oxford at large.
Of course, all colleges got collections of value books as well.
How many individual libraries would you say there are in Oxford?
I know Harvard has 95 of them.
I think we've probably got more.
You see, we've got, there are
35 or 36 colleges.
Every single college has got a library.
Some of them are huge.
There are not as many books in Oxford as there are in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
That's true.
But important books.
I'm sure there are.
We haven't had the resources that Harlow had in great days in the face of Jackson and so on, and simply haven't been able to deploy that kind of research.
But it's still very good.
Roger now moans that he doesn't have any money.
He says, Yale has all the money.
He said, we don't have a financial system.
No.
Well, we've done these a bit well.
When you came in as a librarian at the institution to a party,
This is great.
I'm so glad I came.
What is your formal title, sir?
It's a long one.
I'm a deputy librarian.
I'm for how many people of these books.
Deputy Librarian and?
Paul Hamlin, Keeper of Prince Books.
Paul H-A-M-L-Y-Hemlin.
And Paul Hamlin must be?
And he's a very eminent publisher.
Will there be any kind of booklets or things?
Oh, yes.
So you're celebrating the acquisition of the Tenbury collection.
And this was something that was given or something that we purchased?
College for teaching church music.
It closed down in the 1980s, and it had the finest collection of manuscripts and books after the British Library in the country.
And it had some sort of title to the books.
It said, if the school closes down, I want my music library to get to the bottom.
And this was a hundred years ago.
The man had foresight, didn't he?
He did, yes.
That's wonderful.
So what happened was that they came to a compromise with the trustees of the college, by which they gave us the manuscripts.
And the manuscripts are top manuscripts.
It gives the conducting score appendages aside.
Now, it's not the manuscripts, it's the conducting score.
And that's the other very important manuscript, and it's not the actual appendages.
So you did get the printed books?
We had to pay for the printed books to raise the money.
What we did was having a book section to take our benefit.
I imagine this is one that has, and again I'm not meaning to compare you to Texas because there is no comparison,
When you go back and you say, well, we thought maybe they went over the top instead of spending all their oil money on anything that came their way.
I think one of Harry Ransom's quotes at the time was, well, we are at Oxford and we are at Harvard and stuff doesn't just come our way.
We have to do it.
We have to do it to get it.
Yes.
That's a roundabout way of asking a question.
Are you in a luxurious kind of position where, because you are at Oxford,
that wonderful things will tend to get away.
It does happen.
Being Oxford is not... there is one drawback to being Oxford and that is that people tend to... the alumni tend to think of themselves as members of their colleges rather than of the university.
So a lot of the money goes back to their colleges
There are tight, very close corporations.
The colleges are?
Yes.
So they are too eager to spring some of this money loose for?
Well, it's very up to mothers of college next door, Trinity.
They've got a marvellous collection of plate books, which is given to them by one of their former members.
They often get their former members giving their papers and their books.
to their colleges rather than to the university library.
And people's loyalties are primarily to the college, rather than to the university.
But is there anything wrong with that?
There's still a lot of years.
You see, if people will leave collections of books to Yale, Harvard, Princeton, Cornell, and whatever, because they are a class of 1940s by Princeton, Cornell, and so forth,
They don't think of Oxford in quite that way.
They think that I was up at Morton from 1947 to 1950.
That's the way the Oxford graduate thinks.
He doesn't think I was at Oxford then.
He thinks I was up at Morton or Queens.
The colleges, they do tend to have first pen on people's benevolence.
In terms of money as well as artifacts?
But I can see in terms of the money that the university would really like to have the money so it could use it at its discretion.
But it's probably not so bad if the books go to one of the colleges.
You know, you might like to have them here.
I mean, they're still on campus.
Yes, in general, we wouldn't.
If there are extremely rare and valuable books that are in colleges, we wouldn't duplicate them, because in general, colleges don't dispense of these things.
In general, they don't.
You said Duke Humphrey was the first book collector?
Well, he's the first major book collector, you can call it a known gift, who had given us specific books.
There were earlier benefactors to the university.
So he's somebody I should know about.
You should know about Duke Humphrey, yes.
Somebody, by the way, when I'm pressing with the time.
I'll just give you a quick story from that.
I'd like to ask.
I understand that you are, this is the nerve center, Mr. Robbins was just telling me, and that you actually are involved in the buying or the acquisition, shall we say, of new items for the collection.
These are all recent collections in that we're looking at?
No, they go back a few years.
Collectively, in the last five or six years.
This is the material that remains uncataloged around.
So they await cataloging.
Cataloging, and then they'll enter the general collection.
What if a scholar needed one of these volumes?
Well, if he knew we had it, which is unlikely,
We could find it for him.
No problem.
Are there specific things you're looking for?
Are we really aware of targets of opportunity, so to speak?
Well, we try to build on the strengths of the library's existing collections.
So English literature, history, theology, mainly art subjects.
We don't have much expertise in this section in scientific.
and gaps.
That's always important, isn't it?
Could you spell your Christian name and surname for me, just so I can define it?
Uh-huh.
In your position.
Do you go through dealer's catalogs?
Yes.
That's how you measure it.
every day they come in, and the clerk in the room will put them out into this tray and date them.
It looks like a mag's catalog down there.
This one here, or did I just get this one?
No, it's gone up in the air.
Corritch, fine.
You've got the clerk?
Yes.
Oh, it's fine in a way.
That's the other one.
Yeah, okay.
Yes.
This is exciting.
Yeah, it's a very nice children's book.
You've heard about the AP.
Indeed.
We've discussed it.
Yes.
Well, we've got some monies now from the overflow to the AP.
Wonderful.
And we're spending them on high-spot children's books.
And one came up in a crutch cover yesterday.
That was?
I've known it as 1700.
A poem for children written by a Queen's college man.
It's called Good Manners for Schools.
Dykes, Oswald, D-Y-K-E-S.
That was the one I was telling you about.
I have this catalogue, that's why I was acquired yesterday.
You can get some idea of what kind of thing you go for.
That's great.
There are two and a half books for...
I am particularly keen on getting early English novels which we didn't pick up at the time because they weren't considered important and of course they weren't serious material for a university library and so we do have serious gaps and so it's always
would you say what you have and those areas were came to you largely from private collectors and now you're filling in um well from private collectors but also uh later editions which we have acquired since um and they've since decided they're worth having in the first state yes
Wow.
You got Don Quixote, but you didn't get a chance.
Well, that's fine.
Is that an oversight, do you think, or that was just politics?
I think what I was telling you was that they are the accounts who dominated the university and the library were interested in what they were teaching.
They were not teaching English.
Well, they teach in Spanish, which come to that.
Oh, well, long quick, this is a bit of a...
It's wonderful, though.
But the story of how it came to the university as it was issued, I think, is just wonderful.
Now, for instance, I don't mean to be indelicate on this, but do you negotiate with Qualich on the price, or do you pretty much pay catalog price?
That's important.
And do you kind of have to run it to a committee, or do you have discretion?
It depends how expensive it is.
Something that's going to be over 5,000 pounds, I have to ask the librarian.
We discuss it.
Makes sense.
That's great.
And I think, do we say over 1,000 by discussing it with you?
We're going to move along.
I'd like to be in touch with you again, if that's okay.
I hope to be coming back August, September to do a little more work.
I'm all out of mine, but I will take one of yours.
Great.
There's the house from Shakespeare that I was telling you about.
No, we're looking at, these are perhaps four inches by two and a half inches.
Yes.
Look at them.
Can you see these?
It's how our collections grow.
These came as a gift.
1808.
If they had been an acquisition in a college catalog, it would probably be several thousand pounds each.
Well, we didn't actually know these existed.
They were as rare as that.
You didn't know they existed as publications?
We didn't know they existed.
Can we describe them in some detail while I have my machine running, or just what they are?
Well, they are the first separate publications of LEMS,
Tales from Shakespeare.
And they're in paper, though, which is amazing.
And I see the dates, 1807.
This is Winter's Tale.
They have, I would imagine, hand-colored copper plates.
And published by Godlin.
And you say that these would probably go for several thousand pounds each.
And they came in... As a very generous benefaction from a man who...
had heard we'd got the OP collection.
Wonderful.
And he had some family books in his, some children's books, which had been handed down to his family.
He's a Barrett Browning, a little bit of that.
Is he someone you can identify?
Or do we prefer that he remain anonymous?
Oh, no, I don't think so.
Mr. Edward R. Moulton Barrett.
M-O-U-L-T-O-N-B-A-R-R-E-B-E.
That's a hyphen.
Yes.
And some of the books are inscribed by... Is this a copy of something?
That is something he wrote to tell us about the families.
Okay, that's not something I could have a copy of.
Oh yes, if you'd like one, I'd like that.
Do you mind, sir?
I don't think he would have...
It's the kind of thing I'm writing about.
It's how a collection is energized by another collection.
This just seems to be the excellent illustration.
How successful was the appeal?
Is it a publicly-disclosable figure?
Really?
That is extraordinary, isn't it?
okay this room here is the library which was built to house the collection
It's the, when people think about the library, this is what they think of.
A very large library, there's 2,000 places for readers.
The problem is for the library as a whole.
There are not many reader seats here, but the library as a whole has got over 2,000 reader seats.
Do you all tourists in here?
Only the ballet, I don't think.
So I have a little privilege to walk here.
Is this stone all... This is the original medieval facade of the library.
What you're actually coming with.
This is the staircase.
This is the 17th century staircase.
What is the stone?
Is this a regional granite or something?
I ask a lot of foolish questions sometimes.
Sometimes just for detail, it's nice to know.
other elements yeah and that seal over there and that beside would be that's that's crest yeah that's i think that's the royal arms